Hello, hello hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English.
The show where you can listen to
fascinating stories, and learn weird
and wonderful things about the world at
the same time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today is part
two in our mini series on the Cambridge
Five: a spy ring that infiltrated the
upper echelons of Britain’s political
and intelligence worlds and leaked
state secrets to the Soviet Union.
On a quick practical note, if you
haven’t listened to part one yet,
please do go back and do that, as
this episode leads straight on from
where we left the story last time.
OK then, let’s get into it
and talk about the secrets and
spycraft of the Cambridge Five.
In a central London pub, Guy
Burgess finished off his drink.
The air was thick with the smell of
cigarette smoke, sweat and frothy beer.
Conversation rumbled on in the background,
chair legs screeched on the wooden floor.
As he so often was, Burgess was as
drunk as a skunk, he was heavily
under the influence of alcohol.
But he wasn’t in the pub for social
reasons, he was there on business.
Spy business more specifically, and
he had just established contact with
one of his ‘handlers’ - a Soviet agent
managing him and the Cambridge Five.
Putting down his glass, Burgess stood
up and made his way to the door, swaying
slightly from side to side, the alcohol
now well and truly gone to his head.
But as he pushed the door open, he
dropped his briefcase and several stolen
papers spiralled onto the pavement.
He rushed around to pick them up,
paranoid that someone would see.
Would he be caught?
Would the first of the Cambridge
Five be outed as a double-agent?
Would the dominoes begin to tumble?
A policeman came over to him.
Burgess’s spine began to tingle.
But the policeman didn’t seem interested
in the dropped papers, or rather,
his main concern was helping Burgess
to pick them up and put them back
in his briefcase - documents that
Burgess had stolen from the British
Foreign Office earlier that very day.
Thanking the policeman and snapping
his briefcase firmly shut, Burgess
made his way down the street and
disappeared around the corner.
It was a close call - just
another example of the sheer luck
that helped the Cambridge Five
get away with it for so long.
As I hope you remember from part one,
we left the story of the Cambridge Five
just as the Second World War had started.
By then Philby, Burgess, Maclean,
Cairncross and Blunt had passed
through Britain’s elite private
schools onto Cambridge University, and
were establishing themselves in the
upper echelons of the British state.
Like many students in the political
turbulence of the 1930s, during their
time at Cambridge their political
views had moved far to the left.
Unlike most students, however,
these five men had been
recruited by Soviet intelligence.
They were “The Cambridge Five”.
As the Second World War began, the
Five were beginning to get established
in their careers, in their ‘covers’.
As a quick reminder, Burgess was in the
Foreign Office, as was Cairncross briefly.
Philby was in MI6, Blunt in MI5,
and Maclean the diplomatic service.
Clearly, the Soviet’s plan of ‘turning’
high-flying British graduates before
they entered the ‘corridors of power’
was coming to fruition, that is,
it was really working rather well.
So, what did they actually do as spies?
And how did it work?
Well, essentially, they used their
positions of power to pass vast
amounts of confidential, classified
information East, to the Soviet Union.
If we take the case of Kim Philby,
who is perhaps the most famous of
the Cambridge Five, he spent most
of his career working for British
intelligence, working for the famous MI6.
If this acronym MI6 rings any
bells, yes MI6 is also the workplace
of another famous British spy, a
fictional spy I should add, James Bond.
And if you’re wondering what the
difference between MI5 and MI6 is, MI5
deals with internal, domestic, threats,
and MI6 deals with foreign threats.
Incredibly, Philby was so deeply embedded
in MI6 that he was even made head
of the Soviet counterespionage unit.
That’s right: the Soviet spy was put in
charge of Soviet counterespionage, the
very unit investigating Soviet spies.
As you might expect, this was a huge
win for the Soviets, it was pretty
much the best possible result.
Thanks to Philby, the Soviets knew
most of the names of British agents
operating in Europe in the 1950s and
they had a constant stream of information
on British intelligence gathering.
But Philby wasn’t the only one on an
upward trajectory; Donald Maclean's career
had also gone from strength to strength.
He had become a successful diplomat
in the Foreign Office, and enjoyed
unlimited access to top secret
military and nuclear information,
which he leaked to his handlers.
Guy Burgess had also enjoyed a
successful career, working for MI6,
the BBC, and the Foreign Office.
He rubbed shoulders with spies and
politicians, and just like during his
time at Cambridge, he was incredibly
social and seemingly knew everybody.
He even mingled with the likes of Winston
Churchill, who gave him a signed book.
During the Second World War the quiet
Anthony Blunt worked at MI5, the other
arm of the British intelligence services,
where he passed on information about
German espionage activities in Britain.
And John Cairncross, the final member
and the only one of the five from a
working class background, worked in
the famous code-breaking facility
at Bletchley Park, cracking German
communication codes, stuffing papers
into his trousers, and passing the
information back to his handler.
Now, though Philby, Maclean and Burgess
are perhaps the most famous of the Five,
or the most personally interesting, at
least, during the war it was actually
Cairncross who was doing the most
effective espionage, that is, stealing
the most valuable information, cracking
German coded messages and passing
the information back to the Soviets.
He was even personally credited by the
Soviets for playing a major role in its
victory at the Battle of Kursk in 1943.
In terms of just how much
information was being passed back,
the numbers are quite astounding.
The information included copies,
photographs, codes and original
secret documents, with 1,771 coming
from Blunt, 4,605 from Burgess, 4,593
from MacLean and almost 6,000 from
Cairncross between 1941 and 1945.
In fact, often the Cambridge Five’s
information was so good, so plentiful,
that the Soviets were suspicious,
believing that the men’s seemingly
unlimited access to British state
secrets was reason  not to trust them.
It was simply too easy,
something smelled fishy.
Even Stalin feared it was too good
to be true: that they were, in fact,
long-term double, or triple agents
sent to infiltrate Soviet intelligence.
They were particularly paranoid about
Philby, thinking that his public
communist sympathies as a young man
would have made it unlikely that he
would have become so senior in MI6.
How could it be possible, they thought,
that someone who had been so openly
communist in the past could become
the head of anti-Soviet espionage?
It didn’t seem to make any sense.
But what they probably hadn’t appreciated
was the fact that the British class
system made this possible; Philby
came from a good family, had gone
to the right schools, he could get
away with practically anything.
As the Second World War ended and
the Cold War began, the nature of the
Cambridge Five’s work began to change.
With Nazi Germany and fascism
defeated, they were no longer
spying for an ally but an enemy.
This was, as you can imagine, an
altogether different proposition.
With Nazism defeated, the Cambridge
Five could no longer justify their
spying as part of a broader anti-fascist
fight, but they were now spying
directly against their homeland.
And they became even more important,
even more valuable, to the Soviets.
As you will know, the Cold War was
dominated by paranoia of nuclear war,
and as they moved towards the 1950s,
some of the Five began leaking secrets
about Britain’s nuclear programme.
Cairncross is considered by some to be the
first ‘atomic spy’, and while working at
Britain's Scientific Advisory Committee
he leaked incredibly sensitive information
about Britain’s uranium bomb capabilities.
It's even thought that the Soviets used
information sent to them by Cairncross
to begin building their own atomic bomb.
Similarly, in 1944, Maclean had been
posted to the British embassy in
Washington D.C where he had access to
both British and American nuclear secrets.
As such, he became one of Moscow’s
primary sources of information on
the West’s nuclear development.
Just think about that for a minute.
Two British citizens, experts
working on building up the West’s
nuclear armoury, could be responsible
for giving the Soviets their
own bomb… during the Cold War.
It almost goes without saying,
but this was some serious stuff,
some pretty impressive spywork.
Now, the actual spywork of the Cambridge
Five is very different to any kind of
spywork you might be thinking about
from, let’s say, a James Bond movie.
The spywork of these five men was
all about information, about sharing
confidential, highly classified,
information with the enemy.
So, how did the men actually
leak their information?
Having bits of paper stuffed into
your trousers is one thing, but
how did they actually get that
information to their Soviet handlers?
Clearly, it was a risky procedure.
Every time a document was handed over,
there was the possibility of being caught,
with life-threatening consequences.
Up until 1946, people were still
executed in Britain for treason, and
in fact it wasn’t until 1998 that the
death penalty was completely abolished.
It was scary stuff, so how did
they do it without being caught?
The Cambridge Five, and indeed all
spies whether British, American, or
Soviet, mostly used a system known as
a ‘dead drop’ to pass on information.
A dead drop is essentially when a
spy leaves information - whether
photos or documents or codes - in
a public but hidden place, and
their handler picks it up later.
The idea was that the spy and handler
would never be caught in the same place
at the same time, though when it was
absolutely necessary to speak in person
these meetups were often done in busy
public places so they could blend, and
disappear if necessary, into the crowd.
Just like when Kim Philby was first
recruited in Regents Park back in 1934
and this whole story started, or when
Burgess dropped his briefcase in the pub.
So, where did the Cambridge Five
meet their handlers and where
did they do these ‘dead drops’?
Well, according to Philby’s own words
in a written confession from January
1963, “Our meetings always took place
in outlying districts of London…
and almost always in the open air.”
“The regular drill consisted of
synchronising watches with a neighbouring
clock, appearing at the rendezvous
on the dot, taking at least three
taxis both to and from the rendezvous
to ensure that no one followed.
At each meeting a time and a
place was fixed for the next one.”
We’ll hear more about that confession
in part three, and it's worth
noting, here, that we can’t take
anything the Five say too literally.
For all we know, Philby’s supposed
‘confession’ could have been a ruse, a
distraction, and should be taken with a
‘pinch of salt’, not completely believed.
But this method of meeting in public
places, being punctual and being careful
not to be followed, certainly fits
in with what we know of the Cambridge
Five and spycraft more generally.
They, of course, had to be incredibly
careful not to be followed or caught out.
Philby, especially, as he was heading
the anti-Soviet division of MI6.
If he was caught, it was possible
that the entire Cambridge Five spy
ring would fall apart because he had
been the first to be recruited and
had recommended some of the others.
He could join the dots.
But as time went on and the Five became
more comfortable in their double-lives,
being promoted and becoming firmly
established in their careers, they
were sure they’d never be caught.
As you might imagine, this caused
several of them to become complacent,
to not take as much care as they
should to cover their tracks.
The Cambridge Five - in particular the
now hopelessly alcoholic Burgess - became
increasingly sloppy, careless over time.
And pubs and alcohol more generally
played a big role in the rise
and fall of the Cambridge Five.
All of the men were known
to be heavy drinkers.
Burgess in particular, who
would have met any modern
definition of being an alcoholic.
According to Philby, though he had
recommended Maclean to Otto as a potential
recruit he had actually warned against
Guy Burgess because he was known to be
a heavy drinker and incredibly sociable,
even during his university days.
Burgess was witty and charming,
and known as a ‘man about town’,
we might say, meaning someone
sociable and well connected.
Just as he had bragged during his time
at university, Burgess, it seemed, knew
everyone and mingled with high-society
figures like Winston Churchill’s
niece, the famous economist John
Maynard Keynes, respected writers and
a whole host of MI5 and MI6 spies.
Talk about hiding in plain sight.
But there was another reason that
Philby cautioned against Burgess, that
he warned Otto not to recruit him.
A secret that he shared
with Blunt in fact.
Both men were gay, they were homosexual,
and there is even a theory that the
pair had been lovers at one point.
Homosexuality was still a crime in
Britain in the 1930s, and Philby
thought that someone could use their
sexuality against them, using it to
blackmail them and extort secrets.
But when it comes to Burgess,
his main problem wasn’t his
sexuality, it was his drinking.
According to Soviet files released
years later, Burgess was, and I'm
quoting directly, "constantly under
the influence of alcohol,” and
considered loud and theatrical.
As one MI5 official put it in 1949,
“Burgess appears to be a complete
alcoholic and I do not think that
even in Gibraltar I have ever seen
anyone put away so much hard liquor
in so short a time as he did.”
A loud drunk with a tendency to draw
attention to himself might not strike
you, or seem to be, the ideal spy.
Yet it was actually Burgess’
alcoholism and overly-confident
demeanour that served as his cover.
People looked at him and thought
“a loud and overly confident drunk,
surely he would make a terrible spy!”
How could a man, according to one
biography known as a “smelly, scruffy,
lying, promiscuous, drunken slob,”
position himself in the high-ranks of the
Foreign Office while being a Soviet spy?
Indeed, it was precisely this cover
that made him, for so many years, an
incredibly effective double-agent.
Hiding in plain sight, he
delivered 168 documents to the
Soviets in December of 1949 alone.
Maclean too, according to Soviet files,
was "constantly drunk," and known to
be "not very good at keeping secrets.”
In fact, it's believed that several
of the men - certainly Burgess and
Maclean and likely Philby - actually
confessed that they were working for
the Soviets when they were drunk.
Now, it’s worth spending a little
more time talking about Blunt, the
oldest of the five, as his career went
in a slightly different direction.
After his brief stints in the
army and MI5 during the war, he
explored other interests and he did
far less spywork than the others.
Instead, he had a career in academia
and became a leading art historian with
expertise in French art and architecture.
In his memoir, he explained that
after the war he just wanted a quiet
life: " In fact I was disillusioned
about Marxism as well as about Russia.
What I personally hoped to do was to
hear no more of my Russian friends,
to return to my normal academic life.
Of course it was not as simple as
that, because there remained the
fact that I knew of the continuing
activities of Guy, Donald, and Kim."
In 1945 he even became Surveyor of the
King's, and later the Queen’s, Pictures,
which is considered one of the most
prestigious jobs in the art world.
This meant that he was in regular
contact with the Royal Family, even
staying and travelling with them, and
advised the Queen on her personal art
collection, all while being a Soviet spy.
Like Philby leading the anti-Soviet
programme, Blunt hid in plain sight:
a double-agent camouflaging himself,
or hiding, in the palaces of royalty.
But as the expression goes, all
good things must come to an end.
By the late-1940s the Cambridge Five had
stolen such a huge amount of information
that the intelligence communities on
both sides of the Atlantic began to
suspect that there was a mole, that
there was someone leaking information.
After years of being behind, both British
and American intelligence were beginning
to catch up to the Cambridge Five.
With the net tightening around
them and many unravelling on a
personal level, it all started to
go wrong across the Atlantic, in
the United States, where Philby and
Burgess were working after the war.
But would the two working in Washington
D.C be able to warn their fellow
spies back in Britain in time,
before the authorities got to them?
What would they do,
once they were ‘busted’?
And why did the responsibility for
all of this fall on the shoulders of
the erratic drunk who dropped stolen
papers on the pavement, Guy Burgess?
And why do many think that, at the end of
the day, they actually “got away with it”?
We’ll get into all that, and much
more, in part three, the final part
of this mini-series on the most
successful spy ring in British history.
Ok then, that’s it for part two.
Next up it will be our final part,
part three, where we’ll start to
see everything unravel, secrets to
be revealed, escapes to be made,
and beer to be drunk at breakfast.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds, by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.